>> Here in Flagstaff we
can see one of the problems
that many southwestern gardeners
face, that is wildlife damage
to the garden, especially if
they live near a national forest
and the deer and the elk
come and visit their garden
and feed on their plants.
We're at the garden
of Molly Larson,
one of the Flagstaff master
gardeners who's very innovative
in the way she's
dealing with this:
She's observing what the
deer and the elk like to eat
and what they don't like to eat.
Let's see what she can
share with us about that.
Molly, you have a very
attractive garden here.
>> Well, hello, Curtis.
It is attractive but
mainly to elk and deer.
>> Uh-huh.
What do you have
that they don't like?
>> Well, they don't like
this miscanthus grass
and any of the herbs.
They generally don't touch the
herbs at all because they're
so fragrant and strong.
>> And things that they do love?
>> Come over here, I'll
show you the vegetables.
>> Okay.
It looks like they like beans.
>> They do, Curtis.
They love beans.
Some years my beans
cover these teepees,
but this year I don't
think it will get that way.
>> I notice you got some
plants inside a fence here.
>> Yes. These are plants
that any year the elk
and deer will eat.
I've got lettuce, my bush
beans, corn, sunflowers --
they'll eat those anytime.
>> And so you just start
off with them protected.
>> Yes.
>> Do you have other
things for us to see?
>> Yes, come over here.
It looks like they don't
like to eat tomatoes.
>> They generally
leave tomatoes alone.
Sometimes on a dry year
they'll nip a flower,
but tomatoes are pretty safe.
>> And the turnips look safe.
>> Turnips are safe, Curtis,
but I had beets here
and they're all gone.
>> Uh-huh.
And the squash looks
pretty safe?
>> Squash is safe, too, yes.
>> Okay. I see a tree over
here, let's go look at that.
>> Okay.
>> Now, this is a native tree,
but I see that it's
got some damage on it.
>> It sure does, Curtis,
years and years of damage.
And we finally put this
chicken wire up to protect it.
>> And this is from them
rubbing their antlers on it?
>> It is. They rub
their velvet off.
>> You can see the damage here
and up here on the
branches even.
>> And they even eat these aspen
leaves as high as they can go.
>> Wow. It looks like they're
really not bothering your
peonies pretty much.
>> You're right.
The peonies are safe.
They're good.
But this middle shrub, the
rose of Sharon they eat a lot.
>> Okay. And how about
the lamb's ears here?
>> Well, those little fuzzy
things, they don't touch those.
They're safe.
Lady's mantle next
to it is fairly safe.
That's good.
Your California poppies
they don't eat.
>> Okay. There's quite a
few things they won't eat
but some things they will eat.
>> Yes.
>> And we appreciate the
fact that you're going
to this trouble to find out.
Now, have you tried
any repellants.
>> We have.
Over the years we've tried the
usual soap; bags of human hair;
we've ordered ultrasonic
devices; sprays;
we even ordered mountain
lion urine from a catalogue.
And unfortunately, none
of it works for us.
>> The experts say
really the only way
to do it is to fence them out.
>> We purchased a
motion detector alarm,
and that worked for
quite a while.
But then they got used to it and
all it does is wake us up now.
>> So fences are the option.
If you can't have a fence,
you've got to choose the plants
that they don't like to eat.
Thanks for discovering some
of those plants for us.
>> Oh, you're welcome, Curtis.
[ Music ]